# Reading

- Stefan Müller - Grammatical theory: From transformational grammar to constraint-based approaches
- Chapter 14 - Generative-enumerative vs. model-theoretic approaches

## generative-enumerative

- grammar generates a set of sequences of symbols  
- phrase structure grammars, transformational grammars, GPSG, minimalist grammar

## model-theoretic

- the grammar defines "well-formedness"
- **Note 1**: I would really appreciate being introduced to Model-Theoretic grammars before this.
- **Note 2**: 
- - _"..feature structure to model phenomena.."_
- - Doesn't the generative-enumerative structure of phrase structure grammars also form a constraint-based model? (The constraint being, that it must be viable to construct a tree.)
- - How is HPSG model-theoretic, but CFG phrase structure not? 
- - A possible view: _"Generative-enumerative and model-theoretic approaches view the same problem from different sides: the generative side only allows what can be generated by a given set of rules, whereas the model-theoretic approach allows everything that is not ruled out by constraints."_

## 14.1 Graded acceptability
- _"In generative-enumerative approaches, a particular string is either included in the set of well-formed expressions or it is not. This means that it is not straightforwardly possible to say something about the degree of deviance: the first sentence in (3) is judged grammatical and the following three are equally ungrammatical."_
- **Note 3**: Why can't we look at the number of partial trees, which can't be joined? 1 = grammatical, 2 = less grammatical, etc. (Answered in 14.2)
- _"In model-theoretic approaches, grammar is understood as a system of well-formedness conditions. An expression becomes worse, the more well-formedness conditions it violates"_
- **Note 4**: Interesting, so we grade well-formedness according to the number of rules it violates.
- rules can be weighted

## 14.2 Utterance fragments
- partial trees are more grammatical than nothing
- **Note 5**: I would really appreciate being introduced to Minimalist grammar before this.

## 14.3 A problem for model-theoretic approaches?
- sometimes the agreement is a burden and we want it to remain unspecified or solve it in another way
- _"Niels and Odette are cousins. Niels und Odette sind Cousin und Cousine."_
- English can drop the plural gender agreement altogether, because it doesn't affect the rest of the grammar
- German has adverbial agreement, so it has to be handled.
- Offered solution "plural-index" doesn't have a gender as opposed to "singular-index"